well good afternoon everybody Welcome to
My planetarium show for March of
2025 I've put this together based on
what we can see in the night sky in the
middle of the month I think I've set it
for the 20th of March but apart from the
position of the Moon not much will
change so anytime in March you should be
able to see most of these objects what
we've got we've got the view over the
Cambridge Countryside to begin with at
around about midday and of course the
Sun up there in the bright blue sky not
that we get quite that much bright blue
sky usually in Cambridge but uh we can
turn the clouds off with this marvelous
software so we can uh get a perfect view
I'm running time forwards and we're
heading down towards the western side of
the sky the sun is beginning to set
we're starting to see the sky change
color more of the yellows and oranges
are going to come in as the sun heads
down coming to us through the thick line
of sight towards the horizon there more
and more of the blue light is blocked so
we get those colors of Sunset and we'll
bring it to a stop just here where the
sun has completely
disappeared and begin our tour of the
objects of the night sky moving up over
towards the South we can start to see
some of the Stars we're moving on
letting the uh Sky darken and beginning
to see some of the familiar constant
sttion when we look straight up there's
a whole group of very bright objects
there some of those are planets if we
look at the constellations there's Orion
and Orga two of the constellations we're
going to visit on our trip and then I'm
bringing in the constellations of the
zodiac Aries Taurus the Bull
there
Gemini caner the
crab weo the lion and finally we've got
Virgo coming up over the horizon there
so we're going to have a little look and
a tour around some of those
constellations and of course we're going
to visit Ursa Major and Ursa Minor
because those are the best place to
start when trying to find your way
around the sky the orange line that's
the path of the planets and there's a
couple of Fairly bright things right
next to those we're going to start with
the brightest of them and that's the
king of the planets Jupiter the solar
system is basically flat so they're
always on this line let's zoom in on
Jupiter this is the sort of view you get
with an amateur telescope without the
labels you see the disc of the planet
there with Jupiter and its Cloud belts
it's slightly fatter across the Equator
the uh moons are lined up with that
equator and orbit round that's the most
stable configuration and we have the
cloud belts there in more detail when we
zoom in and a nice tree of white storms
in the uh mid latitudes there down at
the bottom of the dis of the planet
amazing colors and Jupiter is different
every time we look at it now if we start
looking at the great four galileon moons
beginning with this one IO it's covered
in Sulfur all those black circular
features those are active volcanoes
where sulfur is spewing out onto the
surface and all the other colors that
you see there are due to sulfur all over
the surface it's the most volcanic place
we
know now IO is about the size of our
moon and its next door neighbor is
Europa Europa is also the same size and
covered in ice it's really shiny and
very bright and that ice covers over a
waterbased ocean there's probably more
water under the ice on Europa than in
the whole of the oceans of the earth so
so a very good place to go and look for
some sort of biosphere living creatures
perhaps the largest moon in the solar
system now this is ganim if it orbited
the sun we would call it a planet and
that too has a very large amount of
water Frozen up and possibly even some
liquid underneath the ice
crust the fourth Moon of the of the
great four that were discovered by
Galileo is Kalisto the furthest out from
Jupiter and much more quiescent not a
lot of activity going on it's covered in
craters so the surface is not churning
away and uh recovering itself and
burying the craters just lets them
accumulate that's Kalisto not quite as
big as ganime but still a very large
object in terms of being a planet if it
orbited the Sun so that was a quick look
around the Jupiter system now let's go
further up and we'll look at the
constellation of Orga The Chariot here
now
Orga got some bright stars in a nice
circular pattern there and one of those
stars is very very prominent indeed it's
uh called capella there's origo he's
carrying some goats and Orga with
capella capella is the goat star now
this was actually imaged by a telescope
called Coast the Cambridge Optical
aperture synthesis telescope which was
multiple mirrors bringing the effect of
a 100 m diameter dish to bear on the
subject and you could see the disc of
capella in fact there were two stars and
you could see the dis of both of them so
very very powerful instrument indeed now
the other end of things with binoculars
you can go cluster hunting in Orga this
is the pin wheel cluster uh it's about 4
and 1/ 12,000 light years away but you
can see it even with the naked eye on a
nice dark sky a nice dark sight
somewhere the next one is the salt and
pepper cluster about the same distance
but much older this one is half of half
a billion years old rather than just 25
million there's about 1500 stars in
these two clusters and then a third one
that we move across to now this is the
starfish cluster and this is a little
bit nearer it's only three and a half
th000 light years away and it's
intermediate in age so 250 million years
um you can tell the ages of these
clusters because they gradually boil
away as they get older gravitational
interactions causes them to throw stars
out and uh dissipate themselves just
below them we have the Flaming star
nebula we got a reflection nebula on the
left where the blue light of the hot
young stars is being bounced back to us
by a slightly more distant cloud and
then some clouds of brownish colored
dirt and dust out of which the stars
were originally formed and then we've
got a cloud of hydrogen gas being lit up
over here glowing pink the ultraviolet
radiation from a lot of the young stars
is ionizing the hydrogen and causing it
to give off this characteristic pink
color that's very very common and that's
called an emission nebula because the
light is being emitted from hydrogen
rather than being B bounced back to us
in the reflection
nebula so we pulled back away from Orion
sorry aray from origo there and we're
going to move on in our tour now we'll
pull back a bit further and then we're
going to let time run forward a bit so
that the next object on our list is
better placed so we'll do that now you
can see that orange line the plane of
the planets there and Jupiter right next
to it very bright just below Orga and
above a little vshape that's coming onto
the screen at the
bottom but the next place to go is the
Big Dipper the plow the saucepan or the
Great Bear the other features are part
of this much larger constellation of
Ursa Major The Great Bear there's the
bear and you he's a very big
constellation he covers a very large
area of the sky in fact one of the
largest constellations of the lot if we
move down to the tail of the bear we're
going to zoom in on a pair of stars you
can see these with the naked eye as two
separate stars misar and Alor and they
orbit around each other but if we zoom
in on either of them we're going to zoom
in on misar here if we zoom in on them
you find that misar is a double star and
You' get the same with Alor they are a
pair of stars all Each of which is a
pair so a quadruple star system and
multiple Stars systems seem to be the
natural product of the universe the uh
Sun being a solitary star with its
family of planets is rather
unusual next to the tale of the Great
Bear we've got the first galaxy of the
tour this is the pin wheel Galaxy a nice
face on spiral galaxy it's a little bit
lopsided something's obviously happened
to it over on the right hand side there
but that's 20 million light years away
Way outside our Milky Way galaxy
now if we move to the opposite direction
away the other side of the tail of the
Great Bear we're going to find our next
galaxy and this one was the first one
that was noted to be a spiral Lord Ross
with the a great 6 foot diameter
reflecting telescope in Ireland saw that
this was a spiral we didn't know it was
a separate Galaxy he thought initially
it might be a whirlpool in space but
here you can see that it's actually in
the process of devouring a smaller
Galaxy that's come too close to it um
and that's causing a whole lot of stars
to be hurled in every direction a very
chaotic merger going on there so that's
the whirlpool Galaxy there are lots of
other galaxies in this part of the sky
but we're going to look at something
different now we're going to look at the
owl nebula the owl nebula is that
remains of a Dying sunlike Star right in
the center there's a little white dot is
the white dwarf star that's being left
behind as the outer layers of this dead
star are being puffed off out into space
giving it that face of an owl sort of
appearance to
it just up and away from the owl nebula
we've got the next Target which is the
surfboard Galaxy this is 45 million
light years away and it's a another
spiral galaxy but more Edge onto us so
it's much more difficult to see the
spirals going around the central nucleus
there you can see that the nucleus is
slightly orange and the outer layers are
blue and that's characteristic of a lot
of galaxies what happens is that the
process of forming Stars forms a mixture
of bright stars and fainter ones like
the sun and the powerful bright ones are
blue but they don't live very long so
unless star formation continues you end
up just with the orange yellow and red
ones left and that's what's happened
here in bod's Galaxy nice face on Galaxy
old Stars still burning in the center
and the spiral arms still actively
forming new ones hence the blue color
but the cigar Galaxy this one just next
door has come too close to bod's Galaxy
and is being disrupted by the gravity of
its larger neighbor a bit of a train
wreck really it's twisted the spiral
galaxy caus caused lots more gas gas
clouds to collide and new stars to be
formed all over the place there's bursts
of activity and jets of hydrogen gas
being shot out of the Galaxy making it
look very peculiar
indeed now we're going to look at the
little bear we're moving on and the
little bear looks a little bit like a
small saucepan handle same sort of shape
the stars are not as bright so it's much
harder to spot but it's very important
to us because the tip of the very long
tail of the little bear there is a very
important star to both Navigators and
astronomers that's the pole star the
North Star Polaris just so happens at
the moment to be directly above our
heads if we were standing at the North
Pole perfectly aligned with the rotation
axis of the earth so as the Earth spins
once a day Polaris seems to stay still
in the sky and all the other stars move
around it so what I'm doing here is
running time forwards and the sky
appears to rotate around Polaris you can
do this with a camera if you do a long
exposure or a series of time-lapse
images pointing up towards the north
we'll soon identify that Polaris is
barely moving at all and all of the
others are rotating around
it now I'm running time back the other
way this is so that I don't get confused
and everything's still the right way up
so we're going to bring that back to
having uh the little bear just where he
was originally and then stop and move on
away to our next
Target Polaris is also very interesting
because it's a Yellow Giant star and a
seid variable which is a great standard
Candle by which astronomers are able to
estimate distance they pulsate at a rate
according to their true power output and
therefore we can work out how far away
they are based on how bright they seem
to
us so that's Polaris the poar the taale
of the little bear we're going to go
over here now and have another look at a
planet and that's the planet
Uranus in my telescope that looks like a
faint Green Dot it's very much
featureless but it has a fascinating
little collection of moons I can see
five of them the ones that are named
after the Sprites in A Midsummer Night's
Dream by William Shakespeare so we've
got Ariel umal Oberon Miranda and
Titania I'm zooming in now on the planet
it has rings they're very faint they're
not like Saturn's rings and they were
only discovered uh relatively recently
when we had really powerful telescopes
and by the Voyager 2 spacecraft that
flew by Uranus and looked back towards
the the Sun and was able to pick them up
uh silhouetted against uh the
reflections from the Sun let's have a
look at one of the moons they're very
interesting they often get overlooked
this is Titania and we think that these
also are like Europa in that they have a
lot of water there's probably an icy
crust with water ice under underneath
but the path of Voyager 2 didn't take it
very close to any of the moons and no
spacecraft has been back there to
revisit Uranus so we're still uh not
completely overwhelmed with data should
we say and uh it would be fascinating to
send another probe there that could
examine them more closely now we're
looking at Taurus the Bull the
constellation here with that vshape
marking out the face of the bull Great
Big Horns but the rear quarters of
Taurus are completely missing that's
where the con Aries has been placed so
it's only half a bull
really the bright star there that's a
red giant star called alabar and it's
coming to the end of its life and it's
much nearer to us than the vshape of the
con grouping called the hiades on the
back of the bull we have the pades and
this is the Seven Sisters so named
because you can see Seven Stars well I
can't I can only see six these days I
used to be able to see seven but my eyes
are not so good with binoculars you
could see 50 there are about 1,500 all
together in this cluster that formed
about 75 million years
ago so that's the
pades I'm now going to move on and head
up to
another of the objects observed by
Charles Messier in fact the first one in
his catalog M1 and this is an exploded
star it was a giant star and about a
thousand years ago in the year 1054 ad
it was observed to blow up Chinese
astronomers recorded the event and noted
that they could see this new star for
three months in broad daylight and
that's called a supernova when a giant
star explodes like that and it leaves a
Remnant it hurls lots of material out
across space so that's called The Crab
Nebula
so now we're going to just uh let time
run forward a little bit move on and aim
down towards my favorite constellation
of all that's Orion the hunter there's
the stick diagram of Orion with his Club
raised and his arm outstretched towards
Taurus the Bull his eternal foe in the
sky there he
is and Orion very striking you can't
miss it it's a winter constellation that
is very very visible from a large
portion of the Earth Earth at the top
leftand Corner we have ble jur Beetle
juu a red giant star that's due to
explode anytime soon which could mean
tomorrow or it could mean a million
years from now we're not quite sure how
massive this star is and the bigger a
star is The more mass it has the faster
it burns its Fuel and the more rapidly
it will go through its life cycle um and
when bleers does finally die it'll be
very spectacular it blow up as a
supernova but it's so far away that it
won't actually be dangerous to
us the other end of things this is where
new stars are being born this is the
Orion Nebula and a whole cloud of gas
and dust collapsed about five or six
million years ago and started forming a
burst of new stars and once the stars
begin to kick off with their nuclear
fusion they push huge amounts of energy
out and you can see it's blowing a
bubble and blowing the material
away that material will get blown out
and eventually cooled down and
recollapse somewhere else to start
forming another small star cluster now
at the left hand side of the belt of
Arion we have the star alac the others
are Al Lam and
minaka and these are all blue
hot Stars they're pouring out radiation
and the ultraviolet radiation is
lighting up the cloud of gas nearby with
that pink color and then there's a dirty
Dusty finger of gas swirling in front of
it making the Horsehead nebula you can
see that on its side there plus the
flame nebula a little bit higher up now
we're going to move up and away from Aly
attac to the third object that we're
going to focus in on in on a uh and
around Orion there are lots of others
but this is a reflection nebula another
of these blue nebula but here we can't
see the star that's putting out the blue
light because it's hiding behind that
thick dirty Dusty material that blocking
the direct line of sight all we can see
is the blue light bouncing back to us
from a slightly more distant
Cloud so that's Orion there are lots
more things that we could look at
there's Bard's Loop there's the witch
head nebula there's all sorts of things
that we can do and maybe we'll look at
that later
on in another
presentation but for now we're going to
move away from Orion down to his hunting
dog Canis Major the big dog just because
it's just peaking up above the Horizon
there there's the dog and just about
make out the shape of a dog and the
bright star there that's Sirius the dog
star the brightest star in all the sky
except of course for our sun and this
one's bright not because it's
particularly powerful although it is
more powerful than the Sun but mostly
because it's quite nearby it's just 8.6
light years away that's double the
distance of alpha centuri uh the nearest
star to the Sun but we can't see Alpha
centuri in the northern hemisphere so
there are a relatively small number of
these nearby stars that we can pin down
that are bright because they're close
rather than bright because they are
powerful so that's the Dog Stars
serious we're going to move on again to
the smaller of the dogs Orion's going
hunting with his two dogs in the sky and
this time you need to use a little bit
more imagination to make out the shape
of the uh constellation because really
there are only these two stars that make
it up so this is Canis Miner the little
dog and it's those two stars joined by a
line you've got to really try to make a
dog out of that haven't you but there he
is
so just below the constellation of
Gemini and cancer that we're going to
visit in a moment but that's canis minor
and it has one bright star in it pro
which is rather like Sirus a little bit
less powerful um and being further away
it's a bit fainter but uh it's uh very
much a member of the winter hexagon of
bright Stone stars that you can see in
and around this part of the sky that
marks out the territory very nicely so
that's
Pro now you can also see the band of the
our galaxy The Milky Way moving down
between prion and bleers there and in
that Gap there is another
constellation but it has no stars in it
of any note at all and I'm going to show
you what that's supposed to be here it's
the constellation of
monoceros and monoceros is this little
stick diagram here um it's supposed to
be a
unicorn but you really do have to use
your imagination there's the Unicorn
fitting in between Orion Canis Major and
canis minor but there just no bright
stars in it at all so uh they were very
much stretching the imagination but it
does have some nice star clouds in it
this is the rosette nebula a lovely
object to look at with a pair of
binoculars or a small telescope it
photographs very nicely with a camera
with a sort of medium length lens on it
it's very big the cluster in the center
there is about the size of the full moon
so you really don't need very much
magnification because if you do you'll
just drill into the center of this and
you won't see it at all above it we have
the Christmas tree cluster um you can
just about about make out an upside down
Christmas tree shape the bright star is
supposed to be the pot at the bottom and
the triangle pointing to the bottom left
now at the bottom left there there's the
cone nebula and uh there's a lot of
other lit up gas again glowing hydrogen
gas uh around that area this is area is
rich in these star clusters you can see
another blue one to the right there I'm
not going to zoom in any further on that
because we just don't have the time but
it's a fascinating area because it's
part of the Milky Way that's where a lot
of new star cluster formation is going
on uh with in the Dense Star clouds
there so it's worth sweeping around and
seeing what you can
find so that was Orion Canis Major canis
minor and the Unicorn monoceros there
we're going to let time run forward to
midnight and that we'll see the stars
pivot and dip below The Horizon and that
will give us a better view of some of
the others so there's Aion disappearing
below the trees Taurus has gone
Jupiter's just winking in and out behind
the tree there and we're going to go to
Gemini the twins again that orange line
the path of the planets passes through
Gemini there's the twins holding hands
look with their heads cter and Pollock
the Stars at the top and there's the
artwork you see Oro that we visited over
to the right right Orion's Club canis
minor Canis Major disappeared off the
bottom we're going to zoom in on another
exploded star Remnant this is the
jellyfish nebula and this is at least
3,000 and possibly 30,000 years old
we're not entirely sure there's no
historical record going back that far of
any Star being observed to blow up so we
can't pin that one down with any great
accuracy but it was a giant star that
has exploded and seeded the cosmos with
a whole new collection of newly forged
elements just below it we have the
monkey head nebula lovely object to look
at it's upside down the monkey's
forehead is at the bottom his neck is at
the top so you have to kind of pivot
that round in your mind um but you will
see the shape of a monkey there with his
nose and his mouth and his chin um
beautiful colors with the blue
reflection color from the bright star in
the center and then the glowing yellows
and reds of helium and hydrogen from the
uh star nebula
there now another of these planetary
nebula this is a dying star again has
puffed off its outer layers this is the
Eskimo nebula it looks like a small face
with a furry Hood around it when you
look at it through a telescope but this
is a star a little bit larger than the
Sun
that's run out of its Fuel and then just
puffed off its outer layers leaving a
white dwarf star in the center and
that's a nice object to track down you
need a telescope for that one it's
really quite small binoculars just won't
find it for you uh it's rather more
difficult than some of the other objects
that I've shown on this little tour so
that's a bit more of a challenge for
somebody with a a decent
telescope so that was Gemini and we're
going to go next door
now but
first Mars the red planet that's just on
the edge there of the constellation of
Gemini here's the red planet it's got
two moons Phobos and deos fear and
Terror these are uh very appropriate
names since Mars is the god of war and
you can see that Mars is beginning to
show a bit of phase where some of the
shadow on the top left hand side there
as it's moving it away from us onto an
angle but you can see those big volcanos
three in a row and then at the top there
Olympus Mons the largest volcano in the
solar system you can see the desert dark
markings the valis marinaris the Martian
Grand Canyon carving away across the
lower Center there that's absolutely
huge that's the size of the continental
United States that Canyon so it puts the
the uh Grand Canyon in Colorado it's a
shame amazing planet um and maybe we'll
visit it sometime soon now we're moving
on and we're going to look at Leo the
Lion and this does look like a lion um
even without the artwork the stick
diagram says lion to me I think this is
probably one of the better ones in terms
of uh looking like what it's supposed to
so we've skipped over caner the crab on
the right hand side there I did that
last month so we'll not do it now but
Leo is full of galaxies and we're going
to look at lots of galaxies now there's
a couple of galaxies shown here and
these are part of a little grouping the
Leo Trio it's about 35 36 million light
years away and you can just sort of surf
around here looking at different
galaxies they've all got Messier catalog
numbers but they're all different and it
does make a nice little tour to go and
pick them up so this grouping's got m95
and m96 in it there is a third member
m105 of the trio that's up here we go up
and there are three more um it's just
festooned with galaxies some of them are
spirals some of them are much older
merged combinations in the form of
elliptical galaxies so they all look
very different and it's well worth just
going and having a a go at tracking
these down and identifying which one is
which uh the reason there are so many
galaxies in this part of the sky and
here's another triplet over here this is
m66
M65 and one that's called NGC
3628 which I'm amazed that Charles
Messier did not catalog um in his list
because it's right there and you can see
it just as
easily and that's called the hamburger
Galaxy
but the reason that there are so many
galaxies in this direction is that we're
looking straight up out of the plane of
the Milky Way in this direction and it's
uh not obscured by large amounts of dust
and other nebula that are blocking our
view in the plain of the Galaxy so we've
got a much more unobstructed view of
deep space in these
directions um I'm going to move over
here to yet another galaxy this is the
Catherine wheel Galaxy and it's a a bit
of a hard spiral and it shows that color
differentiation really well with the
star formation having stopped in the
center so there are only old stars there
now and only young stars are blue so old
stars are white yellow orange or red and
gradually that color tips towards the
red end as things get more and more aged
because the brighter stars with the
hotter colors the blue hot and white hot
star Stars die first so you get that
color gradation once the star formation
has ceased uh because the galaxies used
up all of its dust and gas in those
regions so now we're going to move
forward from Midnight on towards the uh
early hours of the
morning and we'll see Mars and Gemini
sinking down behind the trees again
there so there's Mars Just winking in
and out of that tree disappear is down
towards the
horizon and there it's
gone and we'll pivot over here and what
we're going to do now is look at the
constellation of
Virgo so this is constellation becomes
visible about now in March but becomes
very prominent through the rest of the
summer as well a bit uh earlier in the
evening we're into the the small hours
here there's
Virgo and and very much in the bowl of
Virgo we have Galaxy's Galore look at
all of these there's one big elliptical
galaxy Messi a87 in the middle there but
the more you look the more galaxies you
can see uh some spiral galaxies
elliptical galaxies irregular ones there
it's a massive cluster of them and that
huge cluster of galaxies has got very
large lar amount of mass and our little
group of the Milky Way and the Andromeda
galaxy and the triangulum Galaxy are all
hurtling towards it and will'll become
part of that giant super cluster of
galaxies way off into the future
sometime uh just because uh the gravity
is pulling them together I think we're
doing something like 2 million miles an
hour and now down over to the east just
Rising we have the half moon so I
thought I'd bring this into the end of
the show here really just to show that
we have the moon there with the craters
cernus and Kepler in the central part of
the Moon the very bright feature arist
starus there as well and all the dark
Seas of the moon so that's uh just
rising at about this time and it's in
the constellation of Scorpio there we'll
see more of that later in the summer
when it's better placed but for now
that's it I'm going to let this run and
thank you very much for listening we'll
be back in April with another show